README.md, before:

# pcsc-z

` › Zig PC/SC API bindings for smart card access on Linux / MacOS / Win32 `

[Docs ↗](https://kofi-q.github.io/pcsc-z) | | [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) | | [Installation](#installation) | | [Usage](#usage)

## Prerequisites

### Linux - Alpine

Required packages:

- `ccid`
- `pcsc-lite`
- `pcsc-lite-libs`

```sh
doas apk add ccid pcsc-lite pcsc-lite-libs
```
To run the server daemon:
```sh
doas rc-service pcscd start
```

### Linux - Debian/Ubuntu/etc

Required packages:

- `libpcsclite1`
- `pcscd`

```sh
sudo apt install libpcsclite1 pcscd
```
Optional packages:

- `libpcsclite-dev` (Required when using the `link_system_pcsclite` build option for native targets).

```sh
sudo apt install libpcsclite-dev
```

To run the server daemon:
```sh
sudo systemctl start pcscd
```

### MacOS/Windows

**`N/A`::** MacOS and Windows come pre-installed with smart card support. No additional installation needed.

<br />

## Installation

```sh
zig fetch --save=pcsc "git+https://github.com/kofi-q/pcsc-z.git"
```

## Build Configuration

```zig
//! build.zig

const std = @import("std");

pub fn build(b: *std.Build) !void {
    const target = b.standardTargetOptions(.{});
    const mode = b.standardOptimizeOption(.{});

    const pcsc_dep = b.dependency("pcsc", .{
        .optimize = mode,
        .target = target,

        // Optional. May be needed when building for native targets, to avoid
        // version mismatch issues.
        // See https://github.com/kofi-q/pcsc-z/issues/8.
        // .link_system_pcsclite = true,
    });

    const pcsc_mod = pcsc_dep.module("pcsc");

    const exe = b.addExecutable(.{
        .name = "pcsc-demo",
        .root_module = b.createModule(.{
            .imports = &.{
                .{ .name = "pcsc", .module = pcsc_mod },
            },
            .optimize = mode,
            .root_source_file = b.path("src/main.zig"),
            .target = target,
        }),
    });

    const demo_run = b.addRunArtifact(exe);
    const demo_step = b.step("demo", "Run PCSC demo");
    demo_step.dependOn(&demo_run.step);
}
```

## Usage

```zig
//! src/main.zig

const std = @import("std");
const pcsc = @import("pcsc");

pub fn main() !void {
    const client = try pcsc.Client.init(.SYSTEM);
    defer client.deinit() catch |err| std.debug.print(
        "Unable to release client: {t}",
        .{err},
    );

    // Detect connected card readers:
    var readers = [_]pcsc.Reader{.empty};
    while (true) {
        var reader_names = try client.readerNames();
        if (reader_names.next()) |name| {
            std.debug.print("Reader detected: {s}\n", .{name});
            readers[0].name_ptr = name.ptr;
            break;
        }

        std.debug.print("Connect a reader to continue...\n", .{});

        try client.waitForUpdates(&[_]pcsc.Reader{.pnp_query}, .infinite);
    }

    // Detect inserted cards:
    while (true) {
        try client.waitForUpdates(&readers, .infinite);

        readers[0].status = readers[0].status_new;

        if (readers[0].status.flags.IN_USE) {
            std.debug.print("Card in use. Waiting...\n", .{});
            continue;
        }

        if (readers[0].status.flags.MUTE) {
            std.debug.print("Card not readable. Check orientation...\n", .{});
            continue;
        }

        if (readers[0].status.flags.PRESENT) break;

        std.debug.print("Insert a card to continue...\n", .{});
    }

    std.debug.print("Connecting to card...\n", .{});

    // Connect to an inserted card:
    const card = try client.connect(readers[0].name_ptr, .SHARED, .ANY);
    defer card.disconnect(.RESET) catch |err| std.debug.print(
        "Unable to disconnect card: {t}\n",
        .{err},
    );

    std.debug.print("Card connected with protocol {f}\n", .{card.protocol});

    const command = [_]u8{ 0xca, 0xfe, 0xf0, 0x0d };

    std.debug.print("Transmitting APDU: {x}\n", .{command});

    // Transmit/receive data to/from a card:
    var buf_response: [pcsc.max_buffer_len]u8 = undefined;
    const response = try card.transmit(&command, &buf_response);

    std.debug.print("Received response: {x}\n", .{response});
}

```
```console
$ zig build demo
Connect a reader to continue...
Reader detected: Gemalto USB SmartCard Reader
Insert a card to continue...
Connecting to card...
Card connected with protocol T=1
Transmitting APDU: cafef00d
Received response: 6881
```

> [!TIP]
>
> See the [E2E test application](./e2e/main.zig) for more involved usage.

## Developing

### Prerequisites

#### Zig

v0.15.1 required - see [`.zigversion`](.zigversion) for latest compatible version.

#### Linux

See [Linux](#linux) section above for a list of runtime prerequisites.

Other relevant development libraries (e.g. `libpcsclite-dev` on Debian-based distros) are included in this repo to ease cross-compilation. No additional installation needed.

#### MacOS

**`N/A`::** Required MacOS Framework `.tbd`s are included here. No additional installation needed.

**NOTE:** To update the `.tbd`s, however, an XCode installation is needed.

#### Windows

**`N/A`::** Required DLLs are shipped with the Zig compiler. No additional installation needed.

## License

[MIT](./LICENSE)

Commit message:

[Zig 0.16] Updates for compatibility with latest Zig (#11)
- Rename references to the now-removed `std.io`  to `std.Io`.
- Update `std.Io.Reader` usage in the E2E test app.
- Update enum type reification for Card.Status flags to use the new `@Enum()` builtin.
- Update min versions, `base-z` dep version, and README installation notes.

README.md, after:

# pcsc-z

` › Zig PC/SC API bindings for smart card access on Linux / MacOS / Win32 `

[Docs ↗](https://kofi-q.github.io/pcsc-z) | | [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) | | [Installation](#installation) | | [Usage](#usage)

## Prerequisites

### Linux - Alpine

Required packages:

- `ccid`
- `pcsc-lite`
- `pcsc-lite-libs`

```sh
doas apk add ccid pcsc-lite pcsc-lite-libs
```
To run the server daemon:
```sh
doas rc-service pcscd start
```

### Linux - Debian/Ubuntu/etc

Required packages:

- `libpcsclite1`
- `pcscd`

```sh
sudo apt install libpcsclite1 pcscd
```
Optional packages:

- `libpcsclite-dev` (Required when using the `link_system_pcsclite` build option for native targets).

```sh
sudo apt install libpcsclite-dev
```

To run the server daemon:
```sh
sudo systemctl start pcscd
```

### MacOS/Windows

**`N/A`::** MacOS and Windows come pre-installed with smart card support. No additional installation needed.

<br />

## Installation

```sh
zig fetch --save=pcsc "git+https://github.com/kofi-q/pcsc-z.git"
```

> [!NOTE]
>
> The `main` branch is roughly tracking zig@latest. The current minimum supported version is specified in [build.zig.zon](./build.zig.zon), though earlier `0.16.0-dev.*` versions may also be compatible.
>
> To use a 0.15.1-compatible version, you can fetch the following commit instead:

```sh
zig fetch --save=pcsc "git+https://github.com/kofi-q/pcsc-z.git#72ca6c7a07f4ec7d42dee3502b7ccdb5993b3858"
```

## Build Configuration

```zig
//! build.zig

const std = @import("std");

pub fn build(b: *std.Build) !void {
    const target = b.standardTargetOptions(.{});
    const mode = b.standardOptimizeOption(.{});

    const pcsc_dep = b.dependency("pcsc", .{
        .optimize = mode,
        .target = target,

        // Optional. May be needed when building for native targets, to avoid
        // version mismatch issues.
        // See https://github.com/kofi-q/pcsc-z/issues/8.
        // .link_system_pcsclite = true,
    });

    const pcsc_mod = pcsc_dep.module("pcsc");

    const exe = b.addExecutable(.{
        .name = "pcsc-demo",
        .root_module = b.createModule(.{
            .imports = &.{
                .{ .name = "pcsc", .module = pcsc_mod },
            },
            .optimize = mode,
            .root_source_file = b.path("src/main.zig"),
            .target = target,
        }),
    });

    const demo_run = b.addRunArtifact(exe);
    const demo_step = b.step("demo", "Run PCSC demo");
    demo_step.dependOn(&demo_run.step);
}
```

## Usage

```zig
//! src/main.zig

const std = @import("std");
const pcsc = @import("pcsc");

pub fn main() !void {
    const client = try pcsc.Client.init(.SYSTEM);
    defer client.deinit() catch |err| std.debug.print(
        "Unable to release client: {t}",
        .{err},
    );

    // Detect connected card readers:
    var readers = [_]pcsc.Reader{.empty};
    while (true) {
        var reader_names = try client.readerNames();
        if (reader_names.next()) |name| {
            std.debug.print("Reader detected: {s}\n", .{name});
            readers[0].name_ptr = name.ptr;
            break;
        }

        std.debug.print("Connect a reader to continue...\n", .{});

        try client.waitForUpdates(&[_]pcsc.Reader{.pnp_query}, .infinite);
    }

    // Detect inserted cards:
    while (true) {
        try client.waitForUpdates(&readers, .infinite);

        readers[0].status = readers[0].status_new;

        if (readers[0].status.flags.IN_USE) {
            std.debug.print("Card in use. Waiting...\n", .{});
            continue;
        }

        if (readers[0].status.flags.MUTE) {
            std.debug.print("Card not readable. Check orientation...\n", .{});
            continue;
        }

        if (readers[0].status.flags.PRESENT) break;

        std.debug.print("Insert a card to continue...\n", .{});
    }

    std.debug.print("Connecting to card...\n", .{});

    // Connect to an inserted card:
    const card = try client.connect(readers[0].name_ptr, .SHARED, .ANY);
    defer card.disconnect(.RESET) catch |err| std.debug.print(
        "Unable to disconnect card: {t}\n",
        .{err},
    );

    std.debug.print("Card connected with protocol {f}\n", .{card.protocol});

    const command = [_]u8{ 0xca, 0xfe, 0xf0, 0x0d };

    std.debug.print("Transmitting APDU: {x}\n", .{command});

    // Transmit/receive data to/from a card:
    var buf_response: [pcsc.max_buffer_len]u8 = undefined;
    const response = try card.transmit(&command, &buf_response);

    std.debug.print("Received response: {x}\n", .{response});
}

```
```console
$ zig build demo
Connect a reader to continue...
Reader detected: Gemalto USB SmartCard Reader
Insert a card to continue...
Connecting to card...
Card connected with protocol T=1
Transmitting APDU: cafef00d
Received response: 6881
```

> [!TIP]
>
> See the [E2E test application](./e2e/main.zig) for more involved usage.

## Developing

### Prerequisites

#### Zig

v0.15.1 required - see [`.zigversion`](.zigversion) for latest compatible version.

#### Linux

See [Linux](#linux) section above for a list of runtime prerequisites.

Other relevant development libraries (e.g. `libpcsclite-dev` on Debian-based distros) are included in this repo to ease cross-compilation. No additional installation needed.

#### MacOS

**`N/A`::** Required MacOS Framework `.tbd`s are included here. No additional installation needed.

**NOTE:** To update the `.tbd`s, however, an XCode installation is needed.

#### Windows

**`N/A`::** Required DLLs are shipped with the Zig compiler. No additional installation needed.

## License

[MIT](./LICENSE)
